docs(guides): add building custom agents guide (#1179)
konflux-ci/fullsend: docs/guides/user/building-custom-agents.md

    optional: true

skills:
  - customized/skills/my-skill

pre_script: customized/scripts/pre-my-agent.sh

validation_loop:
  script: scripts/validate-output-schema.sh
  max_iterations: 2

post_script: customized/scripts/post-my-agent.sh

runner_env:
  MY_VAR: "${MY_VAR}"
  ISSUE_KEY: "${ISSUE_KEY}"
  GH_TOKEN: "${GH_TOKEN}"
  FULLSEND_OUTPUT_SCHEMA: ${FULLSEND_DIR}/customized/schemas/my-agent-result.schema.json

timeout_minutes: 20
```

See [Customizing agents — Harness YAML Structure](customizing-agents.md#harness-yaml-structure) for the full field reference (including optional `security`, `providers`, and `plugins` blocks).

The key pattern to understand is how data flows into the sandbox through `host_files`:

1. **Pre-script** runs on the runner and writes files to `/tmp/workspace/`.
2. **Harness** copies those files into the sandbox via `host_files`.
3. **Agent** reads them inside the sandbox.

The agent never has direct access to credentials. The pre-script uses credentials to fetch data, writes it to a file, and the harness copies the file (not the credentials) into the sandbox.

## Step 3: Define the sandbox policy

Create `.fullsend/customized/policies/my-agent.yaml`:

> 
> ```yaml
> version: 1
> 
> filesystem_policy:
>   include_workdir: true
>   read_only: [/usr, /lib, /proc, /dev/urandom, /app, /etc, /var/log]
>   read_write: [/sandbox, /tmp, /dev/null]
> landlock:
>   compatibility: best_effort
> process:
>   run_as_user: sandbox
>   run_as_group: sandbox
> 
> network_policies:
>   # Required: Vertex AI for model access
>   vertex_ai:
>     name: vertex-ai
>     endpoints:
>       - host: "*.googleapis.com"
>         port: 443
>         protocol: tcp
>         enforcement: enforce
>         access: allow
>     binaries:
>       - path: "**/claude"
>       - path: "**/node"
> 
>   # Optional: GitHub API access (if agent needs it)
>   github_api:
>     name: github-api
>     endpoints:
>       - host: "api.github.com"
>         port: 443
>         protocol: tcp
>         enforcement: enforce
>         access: allow
>     binaries:
>       - path: "**/gh"
>       - path: "**/curl"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version: 1

filesystem_policy:
  include_workdir: true
  read_only: [/usr, /lib, /proc, /dev/urandom, /app, /etc, /var/log]
  read_write: [/sandbox, /tmp, /dev/null]
landlock:
  compatibility: best_effort
process:
  run_as_user: sandbox
  run_as_group: sandbox

network_policies:
  # Required: Vertex AI for model access
  vertex_ai:
    name: vertex-ai
    endpoints:
      - host: "*.googleapis.com"
        port: 443
        protocol: rest
        enforcement: enforce
        access: read-write
      - host: "api.anthropic.com"
        port: 443
        protocol: rest
        enforcement: enforce
        access: read-write
    binaries:
      - path: "**/claude"
      - path: "**/node"

  # Optional: GitHub API access (if agent needs it)
  github_api:
    name: github-api
    endpoints:
      - host: "api.github.com"
        port: 443
        protocol: rest
        enforcement: enforce
        access: read-only
    binaries:
      - path: "**/gh"
      - path: "**/curl"
```

With OpenShell 0.0.38 landed, it needs to be this way.

              cp -r "${SRC}/${dir}/." ".fullsend/${dir}/"
            fi
          done
          for dir in ${LAYERED_DIRS}; do
            if [[ -d ".fullsend/customized/${dir}" ]]; then
              find ".fullsend/customized/${dir}" -type f ! -name '.gitkeep' -print0 \
                | while IFS= read -r -d '' f; do
                    rel="${f#".fullsend/customized/"}"
                    mkdir -p ".fullsend/$(dirname "${rel}")"
                    cp "${f}" ".fullsend/${rel}"
                  done
            fi
          done
          rm -rf .defaults

      - name: Authenticate to GCP via WIF
        uses: google-github-actions/auth@v3
        with:
          workload_identity_provider: ${{ secrets.FULLSEND_GCP_WIF_PROVIDER }}
          project_id: ${{ secrets.FULLSEND_GCP_PROJECT_ID }}

      - name: Prepare sandbox credentials
        run: bash .fullsend/scripts/prepare-sandbox-credentials.sh

      - name: Install fullsend CLI
        uses: fullsend-ai/fullsend@v0
        with:
          agent: __install_only__

      - name: Run my-agent
        env:
          ISSUE_KEY: ${{ inputs.issue_key }}
          ISSUE_SOURCE: ${{ inputs.issue_source || 'github' }}

>           MY_VAR: ${{ vars.MY_VAR }}

Reviewer: This requires them to add it to the variables in their repository, for an example I think it is going too far. Can't we add a simple ABC here as value? Or you want them to add this to their variables (in that case you should mention it somewhere).

# Building custom agents

> How to create a new agent from scratch on a per-repo fullsend installation. This guide uses the `explore` and `refine` agents as a working reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide shows you how to create a new agent from scratch on a per-repo fullsend installation. It creates two example agents: `explore` and `refine`.
```

> How to create a new agent from scratch on a per-repo fullsend installation. This guide uses the `explore` and `refine` agents as a working reference.

Reviewer: We don't have those agents, are those part of your local stuff?

For customizing existing agents (overriding harnesses, skills, or policies), see [Customizing agents](customizing-agents.md).

## Prerequisites

> - A GitHub repository with fullsend [installed](../admin/installation.md) in **per-repo mode** (`fullsend admin install --mode repo`)

Reviewer: The flag --mode=repo does not exist:

```
go run cmd/fullsend/main.go admin install --mode=repo
Error: unknown flag: --mode
exit status 1
```

- The fullsend GitHub App installed on the org (provides token minting and WIF infrastructure)
- Repository secrets configured for GCP Workload Identity Federation:
  - `FULLSEND_GCP_WIF_PROVIDER`
  - `FULLSEND_GCP_PROJECT_ID`

> - Repository variable: `FULLSEND_GCP_REGION`

Reviewer: This is part of the installation, so it can be removed.

## Architecture overview

A custom agent is composed of six parts:

```
.fullsend/customized/
  agents/          # Agent prompt (Markdown with YAML frontmatter)
  harness/         # Execution config (sandbox image, host files, env vars)
  policies/        # Network and filesystem sandbox policies
  schemas/         # JSON Schema for validating agent output
  scripts/         # Pre/post scripts that run OUTSIDE the sandbox
  skills/          # Knowledge documents mounted into the sandbox
```

At build time, the workflow layers these customized files on top of the upstream fullsend defaults. Your files override the defaults — anything you don't customize uses the standard fullsend configuration. See [Customizing agents — Layered Configuration Resolution](customizing-agents.md#layered-configuration-resolution) for details on how the layering works.

> ### Security model

Reviewer: I think this does not belong to a how-to document, it is too referency.

## Step 7: Create skills (optional)

[Skills](../../glossary.md#skill) are Markdown documents mounted into the sandbox that provide domain knowledge the agent can reference. See [Customizing agents — Adding a Custom Skill](customizing-agents.md#adding-a-custom-skill) for how to create one.

Place your skill at `.fullsend/customized/skills/my-skill/SKILL.md`, then reference it in both the agent frontmatter (`skills: [my-skill]`) and the harness (`skills: [customized/skills/my-skill]`).

## Step 8: Create the GitHub Actions workflow

Create `.github/workflows/my-agent.yml`:

```yaml
name: fullsend-my-agent

permissions:
  actions: write
  contents: read
  id-token: write
  issues: write

on:
  workflow_dispatch:
    inputs:
      issue_key:
        description: 'Issue key'
        required: true
        type: string
      issue_source:
        description: 'Issue source: jira or github'
        required: true
        type: string
        default: 'github'

concurrency:
  group: my-agent-${{ inputs.issue_key || 'unknown' }}
  cancel-in-progress: true

jobs:
  run:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout features repo

>         uses: actions/checkout@v6

Reviewer: This needs to clone the current repo to target-repo
```suggestion
      - name: Checkout repository for harness reading
        uses: actions/checkout@v6
          
      - name: Checkout target repo
        uses: actions/checkout@v6
        with:
          path: target-repo
```

                | while IFS= read -r -d '' f; do
                    rel="${f#".fullsend/customized/"}"
                    mkdir -p ".fullsend/$(dirname "${rel}")"
                    cp "${f}" ".fullsend/${rel}"
                  done
            fi
          done
          rm -rf .defaults

      - name: Authenticate to GCP via WIF
        uses: google-github-actions/auth@v3
        with:
          workload_identity_provider: ${{ secrets.FULLSEND_GCP_WIF_PROVIDER }}
          project_id: ${{ secrets.FULLSEND_GCP_PROJECT_ID }}

      - name: Prepare sandbox credentials
        run: bash .fullsend/scripts/prepare-sandbox-credentials.sh

      - name: Install fullsend CLI
        uses: fullsend-ai/fullsend@v0
        with:
          agent: __install_only__

      - name: Run my-agent
        env:
          ISSUE_KEY: ${{ inputs.issue_key }}
          ISSUE_SOURCE: ${{ inputs.issue_source || 'github' }}
          JIRA_HOST: ${{ secrets.JIRA_HOST }}
          JIRA_EMAIL: ${{ secrets.JIRA_EMAIL }}
          JIRA_API_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.JIRA_API_TOKEN }}
          GH_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          ANTHROPIC_VERTEX_PROJECT_ID: ${{ secrets.FULLSEND_GCP_PROJECT_ID }}

>           CLOUD_ML_REGION: ${{ vars.FULLSEND_GCP_REGION }}

Reviewer: MY_VAR is missing, it is required to run the agent.

        run: |
          set -euo pipefail
          mkdir -p "$GITHUB_WORKSPACE/output"
          fullsend run my-agent \
            --fullsend-dir "$GITHUB_WORKSPACE/.fullsend" \

>             --output-dir "$GITHUB_WORKSPACE/output"

Reviewer: This requires `--target-repo=${GITHUB_WORKSPACE}/target-repo`. Setting without /target-repo will make fullsend run wipe all output and lead to mystic errors.

2. **Authenticate to GCP via WIF** — provides short-lived credentials for Vertex AI. Uses Workload Identity Federation (no service account keys).

3. **Prepare sandbox credentials** — the WIF auth creates a credential config that references GitHub's OIDC endpoint, which isn't reachable from inside the sandbox. This script pre-fetches the OIDC token and rewrites the config to use a file-based source.

4. **`ANTHROPIC_VERTEX_PROJECT_ID` and `CLOUD_ML_REGION`** — must be in the workflow `env` block so the `gcp-vertex.env` file (copied into the sandbox with `expand: true`) resolves correctly.

### Workflow permissions

The `permissions` block follows least-privilege:

| Permission | Why |
|------------|-----|
| `actions: write` | Needed to dispatch workflows (chained agents) |
| `contents: read` | Read repository files |
| `id-token: write` | Required for GCP Workload Identity Federation |
| `issues: write` | Post comments and manage labels on issues |

> If your agent does not need to manage issues, remove `issues: write`. If it does not chain to other agents, remove `actions: write`.

Reviewer: The first and last phrases are contradictory, if it follows least-privilege why are we granting more permissions than needed? Just provide the needed for this example

## Step 9: Create the dispatch workflow (optional)

> If you want slash-command triggers (e.g., `/my-command` on a GitHub issue), create a dispatch workflow:

Reviewer: I created this, how do I trigger my-agent if I'm not using this workflow? Does it triggers on issue opening?

            -f issue_key="$ISSUE_NUMBER" \
            -f issue_source="github"

          gh api "repos/${REPO}/issues/comments/${{ github.event.comment.id }}/reactions" \
            -f content="rocket" --silent 2>/dev/null || true
```

## Step 10: Chain agents together

To chain one agent's output into the next (like explore → refine):

1. **In the first agent's post-script**, trigger the second workflow:

```bash
gh workflow run second-agent.yml \
  --repo "$REPO" \
  -f issue_key="${ISSUE_KEY}" \
  -f first_agent_run_id="${GITHUB_RUN_ID}"
```

2. **In the second agent's workflow**, download the first agent's artifacts:

```yaml
- name: Download first agent context
  if: inputs.first_agent_run_id != ''
  uses: actions/download-artifact@v4
  with:
    name: fullsend-first-agent
    path: /tmp/workspace
    run-id: ${{ inputs.first_agent_run_id }}
    github-token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
  continue-on-error: true
```

3. **In the second agent's pre-script**, check for the downloaded context:

```bash
if [[ -f "$WORKSPACE/first-agent-result.json" ]]; then
  echo "Chained context found."
else
  echo "::warning::No chained context — proceeding without it"
fi

> ```

Reviewer: I think this could be its own guide and remove it from there. The guide would be "How to chain agents and reuse outputs"

### Network policy blocks requests

Check `openshell-sandbox.log` in the artifacts. Look for `BLOCKED` entries. Add the required endpoint to the policy file under `network_policies`.

### Agent output fails schema validation

The validation loop re-invokes the agent with the error. If it fails twice, the run fails. Check the agent transcript in the artifacts to see what the agent produced and what the validation error was.

## File checklist

When creating a new agent, you need these files:

```
.fullsend/
  config.yaml                              # Add role name
  customized/
    agents/my-agent.md                     # Agent prompt
    harness/my-agent.yaml                  # Execution config
    policies/my-agent.yaml                 # Sandbox policy
    schemas/my-agent-result.schema.json    # Output validation
    scripts/pre-my-agent.sh                # Data fetching
    scripts/post-my-agent.sh               # Action execution
    skills/my-skill/SKILL.md               # Domain knowledge (optional)

.github/
  workflows/my-agent.yml                   # GitHub Actions workflow
  workflows/my-agent-dispatch.yml          # Slash command trigger (optional)

> ```

Reviewer: What about a general troubleshooting guide instead of this snippet here?
